---
title: Developer Tools
nextjs:
  metadata:
    title: Developer Tools
    description: Setting up development tools for data analysis. You will get acquainted with the command line, Docker, Git, Python, Postgres, VS Code, Dev Containers, and Codespaces. You will learn how to use the tools together. And you will have an automated development setup that installs all the tools you need.
---

Setting up development tools for data analysis. You will get acquainted with the command line, Docker, Git, Python, Postgres, VS Code, Dev Containers, and Codespaces. You will learn how to use the tools together. And you will have an automated development setup that installs all the tools you need.

---

## This may be difficult

For some, this may be the most difficult and time-consuming part of the course. If you are not familiar with the tools, you will spend some time learning and setting everything up.

We have tried to make it as easy as possible to get started. We have created an automated development setup that installs all the tools you need.

If you get stuck, it is highly encouraged to ask for help in the [community](/institute-of-data-architecture/be-part-of-the-community). It can save you a lot of time and frustration, and it helps us improve the course.

## Introducing the tools

### Command Line Interface (CLI)

The Command Line Interface is a text-based tool for controlling computers and software. Different operating systems have different implementations of the CLI, examples are, Terminal in macOS and Linux, and Command Prompt or PowerShell in Windows.

We will use Zsh with the plugin Oh My Zsh.

#### CLI external resources

- {% external_link title="Bash in 100 Seconds" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4EWvMFj37g" /%}
- {% external_link title="15+ Terminal Commands Every Developer Must Know" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV-ven_rxhw" /%}
- {% external_link title="Bash Scripting Tutorial for Beginners" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=tK9Oc6AEnR4" /%} {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}

### Docker

Docker allows you to run your code or programs inside a Linux distribution on your computer, whether you use Windows, Mac, or Linux.

Conceptually you can think about Docker as a virtual machine.

#### Docker external resources

- {% external_link title="Learn Docker in 7 Easy Steps - Full Beginner's Tutorial" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=gAkwW2tuIqE" /%}
- {% external_link title="Containerization Explained" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=0qotVMX-J5s" /%}
- {% external_link title="Docker Crash Course for Absolute Beginners" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=pg19Z8LL06w" /%} {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}

### Git

Git is a version control system. It lets you keep track of changes to your code. It also lets you collaborate with others on the same code base.

If you are new to git, it can be somewhat challenging to wrap your head around. It is recommended to just start using it and don't focus on using it optimally.

Git can be used purely through the command line, or through graphical user interface. In this course we will mainly use VS Code's graphical user interface for Git and GitHub.

A graphical user interface for Git translates your clicks into command line commands. Some tasks are only possible through the command line. To fully utilize Git, learning command line usage is essential. Assuming you are a beginner, a GUI provides a gentler learning curve for gradual concept introduction.

#### Branching

A branch in Git is essentially a unique set of code changes with a unique name. Each branch represents an independent line of development. This allows you to work on different features or experiments separately from the main project's codebase, without interfering with it. Once you're satisfied with the changes on a branch, you can merge it back into the main project, commonly referred to as the 'master' branch.

#### Branching external resources

- {% external_link title="Git & GitHub Tutorial for Beginners #8 - Branches" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=QV0kVNvkMxc" /%} {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}

#### .gitignore

The `.gitignore` file is a file that tells git to ignore certain files and folders. This is useful for files that are generated by your code, or files that contain secrets.

A good resource for generating a `.gitignore` file is [gitignore.io](https://www.toptal.com/developers/gitignore).

#### GitHub

Initially GitHub was a website for hosting git repositories. Today it is a lot more than that. It has added a lot of features for collaboration, and productivity.

#### Git and GitHub external resources

- {% external_link title="Git in 100 Seconds" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=hwP7WQkmECE" /%}
- {% external_link title="How Git Works: Explained in 4 Minutes" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=e9lnsKot_SQ" /%}
- {% external_link title="Git It? How to use Git and Github" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=HkdAHXoRtos" /%}
- {% external_link title="Fork a repository" url="docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/fork-a-repo?tool=webui" /%}
- {% external_link title="~/.dotfiles in 100 Seconds" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=r_MpUP6aKiQ" /%} {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}
- {% external_link title="Kahan Data Solutions' GitHub playlist" url="www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLy4OcwImJzBKzWWb9K_WB3QzaxoiGmxyo" /%} {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}

### VS Code

VS Code, a versatile and open-source code editor, supports multiple languages, code completion, debugging tools, and allows for customization through a wide range of extensions.

#### VS Code external resources

- {% external_link title="Learn Visual Studio Code in 7min Official Beginner Tutorial" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=B-s71n0dHUk" /%}

### Python

Python is a programming language. It is a general purpose programming language, but it is especially popular for data analysis, machine learning, and data engineering.

This course does **not** require any prior knowledge of Python, so all Python code will be made available.

#### Python external resources

- {% external_link title="How to learn Python programming | Gucity_ido van Rossum and Lex Frcity_idman" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=F2Mx-u7auUs" /%}
- {% external_link title="Python for Beginners - Learn Python in 1 Hour" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=kqtD5dpn9C8" /%} {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}

### Postgres

Postgres is a free and open-source relational database management system. It uses SQL as its primary query language, allowing for the storage, retrieval, and manipulation of data.

#### Postgres external resources

- {% external_link title="What Is PostgreSQL?" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yfrrjt1ieyk" /%}
- {% external_link title="PostgreSQL in 100 Seconds" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2Fluyr3lbc" /%} {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}
- {% external_link title="Postgres Architecture Explained" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q56kljmIN14" /%} {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}

### Dev container

Setting up a development environment can be a time-consuming task. It is also a task that is easy to get wrong. A dev container is a way to automate the setup of a development environment.

VS Code has the option to run your code inside a dev container. This means that you can run your code inside a Linux distribution inside a Docker container.

#### Codespaces

GitHub has a feature called Codespaces. It is a way to run your code inscity_ide a dev container in the cloud. This means that you can run your code from any computer, and you don't have to install anything on your computer.

So instead of you spinning up a dev container on your computer, GitHub spins up a dev container in the cloud. And you can access it through your browser or VS Code.

GitHub has a generous free tier, so you can use Codespaces for free.

In this course you can choose to use either a dev container on your computer, or Codespaces.

It is recommended to use Codespaces, since a Docker container's behavior is dependent on your operating system and your chip architecture.

So if you use a dev container on your computer, you may run into problems that are not covered in this course.

You can **always** ask for help in the [community](/institute-of-data-architecture/be-part-of-the-community), but it will be difficult to help due to the differences in environments. If you use Codespaces, you will have the same environment as everyone else.

#### Dev container external resources

- {% external_link title="Get Started with Dev Containers in VS Code" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=b1RavPr_878" /%}
- {% external_link title="Codespaces" url="docs.github.com/en/codespaces/overview" /%}
- {% external_link title="🔴 Using PostgreSQL inside VS Code Dev Containers & GitHub Codespaces" url="www.youtube.com/watch?v=JTHTWp9DIZQ" /%} {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}

### Environment variables

When you have a program, you may want it to behave differently depending on where it is deployed. The most common use case is development and production. You may want not your developers to connect to the production database when they are working on new features.

A way of handling that is to set a variable on the machine that is running the program, that can be on the developers computer, the production server, or in our case a codepsace.

Later in the course [we will set an environment variable on our codespace](/relational-databases-for-analysts/creating-dummy-data#generate-the-dummy-data-automatically-when-creating-a-codespace) that tells our codespace to auto create dummy data everytime a codespace is created.

#### Environment variables external resources

- [What are Environment Variables, and how do I use them? (get,set)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ADh_OFBfdEE) {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}
- [Linux for Programmers #7 | Environment Variables](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yM8v5i2Qjgg) {% badge %}Optional{% /badge %}

---

## The devcontainer setup

_**Don't worry**, this may seem overwhelming, but after this explanation, we will show you how to get this working with just a few clicks of the mouse._

The devcontainer setup is a way to automate the setup of a development environment. It is a set of scripts that installs all the tools you need to get started with data management.

The most common way of using devcontainers is to use it with VS Code, install the _Remote - Containers_ extension, and then have **one** devcontainer for your entire project.

Since we need Postgres instance we need to have a seperate container for Postgres, and a container for the rest of the project. To bind it all togeather, we use docker-compose for orchestration.

### devcontainer.json

The `devcontainer.json` file is a file that tells VS Code how to setup the dev container. It tells VS Code what Docker image to use, what extensions to install, and what commands to run.

{%
    githubfile
    githubName="InstituteOfDataArchitecture"
    repo="DevelopmentSetup"
    branch="main"
    filePath=".devcontainer/devcontainer.json"
    language="js"
/%}

### docker-compose.yml

The `docker-compose.yml` file is a file that tells Docker how to setup the containers. It tells Docker what images to use, what volumes to mount, and what commands to run.

{%
    githubfile
    githubName="InstituteOfDataArchitecture"
    repo="DevelopmentSetup"
    branch="main"
    filePath=".devcontainer/docker-compose.yml"
    language="js"
/%}

### Dockerfile

The `Dockerfile` file is a file that tells Docker how to setup the image. It tells Docker what base image to use, what packages to install, and what commands to run.

{%
    githubfile
    githubName="InstituteOfDataArchitecture"
    repo="DevelopmentSetup"
    branch="main"
    filePath=".devcontainer/Dockerfile"
    language="yaml"
/%}

### .vscode/settings.json

The `.vscode/settings.json` file is a file that tells VS Code how to setup the development environment.

{%
    githubfile
    githubName="InstituteOfDataArchitecture"
    repo="DevelopmentSetup"
    branch="main"
    filePath=".vscode/settings.json"
    language="js"
/%}

---

## Development setup with just a few clicks

- Create GitHub account
- Go to {% external_link title="DevelopmentSetup" url="github.com/InstituteOfDataArchitecture/DevelopmentSetup" /%}
- ⭐️ Star the repository
- Fork the repository
- Create a Codespace _(should take 3-5 minutes)_

{% youtube videoId="sBUGh_tlq14" /%}

### Test the setup

It is now time to both test the if the codespace is installed correctly, and to answer the first three selfassessment tests.

{%
  training
  title="1.1.1 What is the result of whoami?"
  course="relational-databases-for-analysts"
  lesson="developer-tools"
  links_to="training"
/%}

#### Test Python

To test if Python is installed correctly. In the codespace, run the following Python code.

{%
    githubfile
    githubName="InstituteOfDataArchitecture"
    repo="DevelopmentSetup"
    branch="main"
    filePath="courses/1-relational-databases-for-analysts/1-test-the-setup/1-test-python/python-logging.py"
    language="python"
/%}

{%
    training
    title="1.1.2 What is the number in the terminal?"
    course="relational-databases-for-analysts"
    lesson="developer-tools"
    links_to="training"
  /%}

{%
    training
    title="1.1.3 What is the number in the logfile?"
    course="relational-databases-for-analysts"
    lesson="developer-tools"
    links_to="training"
    top_margin=true
  /%}

#### Test Postgres

To test if Postgres and sqltools are installed correctly. In the codespace, run the following SQL code.

{%
    githubfile
    githubName="InstituteOfDataArchitecture"
    repo="DevelopmentSetup"
    branch="main"
    filePath="courses/1-relational-databases-for-analysts/1-test-the-setup/2-test-postgres/create-cities-table.sql"
    language="sql"
/%}

{%
    githubfile
    githubName="InstituteOfDataArchitecture"
    repo="DevelopmentSetup"
    branch="main"
    filePath="courses/1-relational-databases-for-analysts/1-test-the-setup/2-test-postgres/total_population.sql"
    language="sql"
/%}

{%
    training
    title="1.1.4 What are the value of total_population?"
    course="relational-databases-for-analysts"
    lesson="developer-tools"
    links_to="training"
  /%}

{% articlefooter %}
